Title: Short essay about my experiences on duolingo.com
Date: 2012-10-08 13:26
Author: admin
Category: Learning
Slug: short-essay-about-my-experiences-on-duolingo-com
Status: published

Well, it has been a hell of a time since I updated my blog. Honestly, I
was kind of unmotivated doing anything on my VPS, but recently I solved
some old issues (setting up DNS server, general administration things on
my ubuntu 12.04) and I thought: Yeah, it's definitely time to feed my
countless readers (yeah, you just met the first time my irony) with new
interesting nibbles. And since I am a more or less motivated Spanish
student, I thought I could share my pros and cons with duolingo.com.

I started learning Spanish approximately 5 months ago, when I began my
spontaneous planned trip to Costa Rica. I was brutally thrown into (at
least compared to Europe) very poor country and took for 5 weeks Spanish
classes. Retrospectively, I'd say that I learned pretty quick how to
communicate and express myself, but I completly fucked up my
understanding of the language on the long term, because I learned it on
the incorrect way. Before I even understood what my discussion partner
intented to say and would have exposed me therefore in a silly but
perfectly normal situation when I requested the unknown word/sentence,
where I would need to reveal that I didn't understood,  I just continued
chatting and babbled in incorrect Spanish, just to save the conversation
and my misplaced ego. Back in Europe, I realized that I need to build up
a solid fundament, before I dare myself to improve, so duolingo.com came
convenient.

First of all: Duolingo.com is absolutely addictive. You can gain skill
points to monitor your learning curve and you can even track other
learners to compare, which additionaly boosts your ambition. There are
lots of courses and you need roughly 3-5 months to complete the grammer
part, if you learn 100 points each day. I need normally around 45
minutes to gain my 100 points. Then every course consits of a
translation part, which states the initial purpose of the whole platform
and will bring light into your smouldering question: Why the hell offers
duolingo.com free high quality language curses, whereby other platforms
sometimes claim for an equivalent supply a great amount of money?

 

Well, the idea behind duolingo is, that the many hundred thousands
learners will translate documents. These documents could be blog entries
of a very successful internet platform in the english language area. But
now, the 500 million Spanish speaking people on this earth can't access
this obviously interesting information and therefore, a lot of potential
advertising consumers are just lost. The idea is, that the thousands of
learners translate these valuable information for to make them
accessible by other target groups. Duolingo.com plans to sell
translation services and I asume that out there in the wildlife, such a
service is sought. Now that we discussed the general concept behind
duolingo.com, how good can you effectively learn the foreign language?

In general, I strongly think that there is no such thing as a didactic
wondertool, which turns you into a native speaker in serveral weeks or
even months. You will adapt and understand a great deal of a language if
you all day long learn it, live it and you are completly surrounded by
it. This is the case if you make an abroad year on a foreign universtiy
for example. Then, if you are motivated and if you're extroverted,you'll
probably be fluent after 3 or 4 months. But if you learn 1 to 2 hours a
day on duolingo.com, you have a much harder path to follow. After 4
months of daily learning on duolingo, you have a nice vocabulary and a
idea of how the language works, but you don't really feel it and won't
have this verbal/emotional relationship towards the sound and feeling of
the culture/language itself. You'll be able to translate advanced
content into Spanish and you will most likely understand the idea behind
a Spanish book, but you can't really use the language in daily speech.
Duolingo replaces in my opinion the common schoolastic approach and
increases the fun level, but it can't teach you a language. There we
will need a different strategy: Learning in webcam lessons with foreign
people out there! I guess there are thousands of young folks out there
who want to learn your language and you want to learn their, so you can
exchange and learn from each other. Then, there wouldn't be any
hindrance to learn a language completly in the internet. An amazing
idea!

 
